Welcome everyone! I am so excited to welcome you here to this session where
we get to introduce you to Positron. This is a very early stage project that was
just made public about six weeks ago and I am the first of seven speakers in this
session. We're each going to speak for roughly ten minutes and at the end we
will have time for questions. So as we're going through these talks feel free to
add questions to Slido. You should be able to find the Slido code
either in the schedule or on Discord and you can direct any question to a
specific one of us or just we as a team can answer them there at the end
together. So my name is Julia Silgi. I'm an engineering manager here at
Posit and I've been working on the Positron team for about the last year. So
Positron is a new next-generation data science IDE. IDE stands for Integrated
Development Environment and it is a piece of software that allows you as a
user to yourself develop software. So here in this example screenshot somebody
is writing a report using Cordo and R and there are there are a ton of IDEs
out there in the world and what we're going to do during this session is tell
you a little bit about what's new and or different and or special about Positron
so that you can know why we're building this and also maybe more importantly
whether it might be a good fit for you. The first thing I want to tell you is
that Positron is an IDE for data science. We at Posit have just extensive
domain knowledge when it comes to data science tooling and we know that someone
who is writing code to analyze data is different in some pretty fundamental
ways from someone who is writing code for general software engineering
purposes like if they're building a website or building a mobile app. So we
are huge proponents of code first data science as opposed to a GUI tool or like
a no code or a low code solution but it is a fact that tools that are built for
a typical software engineer who is writing code they're often not a good
fit for someone who is just right he was writing code to analyze data so all
across our org pretty much every single thing we build or make or do is informed
by how deeply we know this and we believe in this that we can make you as
a data practitioner more productive by building tools that are specific for the
kinds of tasks that you need to do. So this is exactly why we're building a new
IDE. There isn't anything quite like Positron out there and we hope that it's
going to become one platform where you can do all of your data science. The
second thing I want to tell you is that Positron is a multilingual or polyglot
IDE. Currently as of today it has support for both R and for Python. A lot of
environments that are built for you to do data analysis are specifically built
just to use one language for scientific computing. So tools that you may have
heard of or you know you yourself have used that fall into this category
include RStudio, things like MATLAB, IDEs like Spyder. There's a lot of these and
there are real limits to these kinds of tools and IDEs especially for the high
and growing proportion of you who use more than one language for your
data science. You can use more than one language literally on the same project,
maybe R and Rust. You can use more than one language over the course
of a week where you switch between projects. Maybe some projects you use
with Python, some you use with R. Almost certainly this is going to happen to
all of us over the span of years or our career. And so by contrast with the
IDEs that are built just for one language, Positron is built with front-end
user-facing features that are about the tasks you need to do. So here in this
screenshot you see that interacting with your plot, seeing the variables that you
have defined. But then there are back-end language packs that are the
engines for providing these kinds of features and tasks. So here the engine in
this screenshot is Python where you're using writing Python code in
the source editor, executing it interactively in the console, and then
seeing the results that you have in different kinds of pings. So it's a tool
for writing code and exploring data that's going to work well for you no
matter what language you use for data science. As of today in its early stages
it ships with support for Python and R. But it is built in such a way that it
can be extensible. Other data science languages can be added into them whether
they exist now or don't even exist yet today. This is really exciting and I know
a lot of you in here are wondering should I switch right now? And you're
already probably starting to get an idea of what might push you to a yes answer.
Like you are one of those people who uses more than one language for data
science. I do want to emphasize that Positron is a very early stage project
and there is no need to switch today if you are happy with your code writing
editing kind of experience. But in the talks and the rest of this session
we specifically chose them and designed them to help you who are sitting here or
who are listening to understand if it's a good fit for you today and if you
should switch. The third thing I want to highlight about Positron is that it is
both extensible and familiar. It's familiar to many of you who are sitting
in this room with us right now because it is the design of it is inspired by
and informed by our organization's experience building RStudio. Here you
see a very RStudio like interface. There's a console, a source editor,
help pane, but it is being used with Python instead of with R. For some of you
we know this is great news. This is what you have been wanting. This is what you
have been looking for. But for some of you this may make you nervous because
you may be wondering what is happening to RStudio. So RStudio is incredibly
stable and solid software. It has over a decade plus of real-world use on it and
for many of you it is probably the best choice today for your work and that may
be true for quite a while yet. So we expect people to use RStudio for their
real-world use for for many many years to come and we're committed to
maintenance for RStudio for the long haul. Positron also is going to feel
familiar to those of you who are in this room who have used Visual Studio
Code and that's because it is built on the open source components that make up
VS Code. You're going to hear more about this a bit later but I just want to
highlight one thing about this is that this makes Positron very extensible.
Building on top of Code OSS opens up the wide world of Visual Studio Code
compatible extensions for users who do want that data science specific IDE
kind of experience. One of the big investments that we needed to make in
order to build Positron was a new modern language tooling for R. This already
existed for Python and we only had to incorporate it and integrate with it.
When it comes to R we had to start from scratch. Positron has a brand new
Jupyter kernel for R called ARC which stands for an R kernel and you'll
hear more about ARC later but it is software that allows R to talk back and
forth with a front-end such as Positron. It gets you completions, diagnostics,
debugging which is what this screenshot shows. Someone is running their R code in
a debugger. Just a ton of different features that improve the experience of
writing R code in some exciting ways. With that I'm run through our
introduction. I want to thank you so much for walking through me through this
introduction. Hello everyone I am Isabel and I first learned about RStudio and
perhaps data science in a course called Intro to Data Science where my professor
Dr. Sanchez had us all download RStudio and that first day in that class was
kind of magical. You know I got to explore data like in this like data
explorer. I could see my variables in a viewer pane. If I was confused I just put
a question mark next to what I was confused about and I made my first plot
that was not in Excel. I can explore data pretty quickly and this RStudio
IDE made this data science experience feel so magical and so accessible and so
joyful. I went on to do more schooling, more learning, more classes and RStudio
was a tool that grew with me. I finished my degrees. I took a job doing data
sciencey things in Python and I realized that like hey this data science life
cycle doesn't change even if the tools I use or even if the language that I use
changes. Something that did change was the tools I used and it felt like there
wasn't quite an IDE that supported code first data science the way that RStudio
did. Some tasks sort of felt like I was stubbing my toe on the corner of a
table and okay like stubbing your toe is painful but it doesn't really impact
your day until your day involves you stubbing your toe over and over again
for about eight hours. I wasn't able to find this IDE experience that not only
minimized my pain but maximized my data science productivity. A few years later
I've now hobbled my bruised feet over to helping out with building the Python
experience on the Positron IDE. I hope we can convince you that we've built a
tool that saves you a bit of pain and maybe brings you a bit of joy. So how
does Positron support data scientists? As a whole Positron is segmented into kind
of these different panes. Up top you have where you are running code and kind of
how you're running code. There's a file that shows you the code that you are
running, a sandbox for development, and over on the right hand side there's a
bunch of different panes to help you explore the code that you're writing. It
sets you up for success when you open up Positron to look something like this.
You can see my Python script surrounded in pink, you can see a console that's in
blue, and you can see these two green squares that have panes that help you
understand the variables and the plots that you're creating. We'll call this
four-pane data science. These panes are not intended to replace your code first
data science experience but rather give you this UI plus code to make you a
little bit more productive and feel a little bit like we're doing some
interior direct decorating in your IDE. As you've written Python code before
perhaps the first way you have stubbed your toe is trying to figure out how to
run the Python you want. Specifically what virtual environment are you using?
How are you selecting it? How are you activating it? How do you make sure
you're running it in the right place? And you can see in Positron there's
something called an interpreter selector. You might recognize here a few
different ways to run your favorite Python, whether using Conda, pyenv, venv,
poetry, virtualenv, or something else. When you click that power button
Positron will activate and turn on this Python interpreter for you all across
the IDE. If you want to swap between you can just turn it off, select a different
one, and it just kind of works. Positron it discovers all of your virtual
environments you have on your computer, you're able to browse between them, and
it will also remember per project which virtual environment you have been using
and automatically start it up for you each time. And don't fear for the R folks
in the crowd, I'm talking about Positron with Python here today, but everything
I'm talking about applies to R as well if you have multiple versions installed.
The drop-down only is going to populate with the languages you use, so if you
only have R installed on your computer you're not going to see Python at all,
we're only going to show you what you want. And a pretty common workflow for
data scientists is, you know, creating a Jupyter Notebook, doing all your
exploration, and maybe copying this out into a Python script as
some sort of artifact for a pipeline. Or perhaps you're running IPython in a
terminal and again copying and pasting things over. It's all to say that data
science is very experimental, iterative work, and it's convenient to have a tool
that understands this is the data science development lifecycle. Positron
does support running Jupyter Notebooks, but if you're someone who works for in
Python scripts, we have an interactive built-in console. You can use command
enter to interact to iterate through a script, you can move back between this
console and your script, it kind of gives you a sandbox to play in. You're able to
explore your data more deeply and bring the final results back into some sort of
reproducible script, perhaps part of a pipeline. And the console has all the
affordances you would expect, you're able to use things like autocomplete. And with
the right Python running, we're already off to a good success story. But the
first thing you're going to want to do in your data science lifecycle is import
some data. And one thing you might be wondering as you're building this
database connection is like, what tables do I have on hand? And in this four-pane
data science, one of the panes we have, P-A-N-E-S, not like subbing your toe pane,
is when you connect to a database, there's a connections pane. So when you
create this connections object in something like SQLite, you're able to see
all of the tables, all of the rows, all the columns, and their
types at a really high-level glance very quickly. It makes databases just a little
bit easier to navigate. With some data in hand, you're probably going to want to
tidy it up. And the first question you're probably asking yourself is, what does
this data even look like? There's a few different ways that Positron allows you
to explore your data. If you're viewing data from a database, there's this little
eye that pops up if you hover, or there's a table that shows up in this variables,
and you can even just type view data in your console. All three of those
locations will bring you to the Data Explorer. When you open up your data,
whether it's from a Polar's or a Panda's data frame or a database, you can see the
percentage missing per column. The name you can see in this data is never
missing, where our Ferris wheels that we're looking at almost are never
closed. If you want to do some really quick looking at your data, you're able
to filter. You can sort by ascending or descending, or maybe you just want to
look at the Ferris wheels that are between 150 and 200 feet tall. If you
know what data you've collected, you're going to want to understand it a little
bit better. And sometimes tidying is messy business. It involves creating lots
and lots of variables, and while for a while you can keep them all in your
brain, at some point it just is too much information to keep up here. There's
something called a variables pane. As you're creating each variable, it shows
up and it gives you a little bit of information about it. You can see kind of
on this most left-hand side, it says the name of the variable. In the middle, it'll
give you either a preview of the data, the actual value of the variable itself,
or some sort of other helpful information. And furthest to the right,
you either get an icon that you can click on and interact with, like opening
this up in the data viewer, or it'll give you the type of variable it is. We also
allow you to expand variables. So let's say we have this dictionary and we want
to see maybe what all of the names are, and we can quickly look at this without
having to type out in the console, and allows you to just, you know, search
through your information a little bit more fluently. We're also able to see
functions with a function signature, and if it's something that's custom, like
perhaps a new Ferris wheel class, there's reasonable defaults that allow you to
understand what you have in your environment. And so countless times, as
you're making all of these variables, I've run into a time where I like
there's a function or method that I'm not quite sure what to do with, and I'm
a little confused, like what does this parameter mean, and what method should I
use? And normally my workflow involves going to the web, finding the
documentation, finding the function I want inside the documentation, scrolling
through documentation, perhaps getting distracted partway through, ending up
watching cat videos, you know, who knows? And that was something I loved in RStudio
and I couldn't quite find in the Python world. So Positron allows you to get help
for functions, classes, or modules in Python just by adding a question mark
next to it. It'll send you directly to the documentation in the help pane, and
it gives you kind of that quick and easy information on hand directly for what
you want. It might feel familiar for people coming from RStudio, you guys
already had a fantastic help pane, but this isn't something that Python users
are used to, so when I tell you this was mind-blowing to me, this is cool
stuff here. Especially when you can scroll down and things are interlinked, so you
can click through different examples, you can see what, you know, you're helped,
you're stuck on, gives you a great place to start. And after, you know, you've
built all your variables, it's time to do some plotting, and nobody makes beautiful
plots on their first try. If you do, maybe you've transcended IDEs, I'm not
quite sure, it looks something like this in Positron. There's a plots pane that, as
you iterate, as you generate these codes in the console, they show up in the
plots pane, and you get this filmstrip across the bottom. Between each plot, you
can see, you know, where you've come from, what works, what doesn't, as you're trying
to build the beautiful plot to explain your data to others. Or, if you're someone
who wants to continue on the same plot object, you can see it automatically
update in the plots pane. You can see here, like we're adding different colors,
we're adding different labels, and you can also resize and export your plot
from the plots pane into a variety of formats. So, you can see we can make it a
square, and we can export it as a PNG, JPEG, SVG, or PDF. And finally, it's time to
communicate this with others. So, how can we share the beautiful data science
artifacts that we're creating to others? We have something called a viewer pane.
This is also something that might be familiar if you're coming from RStudio,
and this plays nicely with the VS Code extensions that you might have already
seen and loved, like the Quarto extension. This is interactive HTML that automatically
gets populated in the viewer pane. This is a Quarto extension, but there's also Shiny
extensions. So, when you run your Shiny app, it'll pop up. You can interact with
this directly in the viewer pane. You can also see other things like APIs,
like great tables tables, and a variety of other HTML documents. So, Positron is doing
a little bit of interior decorating in your IDE space. It's adding in new furniture
and taking out that table that you keep stubbing your toe on. Hopefully,
this allows you to walk through your data a little bit more fluently and avoid a
little bit of pain. We make these tools to help you because we know data science
can be messy business. It comes with its own pain.
My name is Tom Mock. I'm a product manager for Positron, and I'm excited to talk a
little bit more deeply about one little area of Positron and how much focus we put
on the little design principles within it. So, when you first start opening your data,
you might want something like a data viewer, right? In RStudio, there's a data
viewer. You can see your grid, or you might be opening things in tools like Excel
because you want to kind of walk through your data or feel the data or explore
individual cells as opposed to doing group by operations or summarization.
So, of course, we built this into Positron and made it available for both Python and R.
But we didn't want to stop with just a data viewer. So, we've actually built what we
call a next-generation data explorer. Of course, it still has that data viewer grid
that people are looking for in terms of individual cells and the interaction of an
indice, a column, and details about them. But we also have things like a summary
panel showing you summary statistics that are appropriate for that data, you know,
measures of central tendency for numeric data or unique values for strings or
categorical data. There's also missing data and column names there as well as their
type. And lastly, we also have a persistent filter bar that allows you to create,
delete, and see the filters you've applied to your data as you're exploring it.
Now, of course, this is not intended to replace your code-first data science,
but be used with your in-memory R or Python data frames. So, let's talk a little bit
about that. For the grid design, it's, again, intended to be this polyglot tool.
So, it's just as good in R as it is for Python. You can expose these data frames
into the data explorer by calling view in R or Python, and that will then populate it
into the data explorer or using the workflow that Isabel showed with clicking the
table button. What this means is that the code that you write in R or Python also
updates the view in the data explorer. So, here, I overwrite a column and change the
year from 2013 to 2014, which affects the variable column as well as the summary
statistics. So, this is reactive to the changes you make in code as you move back
and forth between them. Beyond that, though, we've tried to make it something
that's highly scalable. So, again, in this example, I have 31 million rows,
24 columns, and in real time, I can scroll horizontally or vertically across anything
in the data frame, and it will kind of instantly load that data. We do a lot of
clever things with caching, fetching different windows of data to try and make
it efficient in this way. But we've also sweated a little bit of the small stuff.
So, things like sorting. It's not just one column. It's multi-sorting. So, you can
sort multiple columns at a time and show which order you've sorted them in and
remove different sorting as needed so you can modify your data ephemerally in this
way. We've used model space fonts in the grid to show you things like nice decimal
alignment, problematic things like white space, or differentiating simply between
one, I, and L of various capitalization. And then, lastly, for the grid, we've
worked really hard on automatic column width so you can fit as much data
horizontally and vertically as possible as opposed to these really, really wide
columns when you've got a short variable name and short values. So, the grid's
great, but what about this filter bar? We've intentionally decided to add a
filter bar that's outside of the data viewer because it allows you to see the
filters you've created no matter where you are in your data. You can imagine I
might have 100 columns or 1,000 columns, and I might forget I made a filter on
column 1. So, we want you to be able to see them and delete them as needed. But
you can always quick add a filter, you know, at one specific column and have it
pre-populate that column name. This also gives us the ability to have more rich
filtering. So, not just I'm filtering on a single value, but for something like
strings it contains or starts with, or even a regex that says, like, okay, this
match. And for numbers, we have typical Boolean numeric operations, less than,
greater than, or even between two values. So, a lot of power here in how we built
the filters. And lastly, more closing out, we have the summary panel, which again
has a lot of different component parts. We have the type. So, as a symbol, we can
show you the type and the column name. If you double click on the column name,
it'll instantly move you to that column within the Data Explorer. We show you
missing data. So, even without having to do an operation, you can see, oh, this
column is 100% missing, or it's got a few missing values that I can work on.
And then there's summary statistics here that show you appropriate things for
strings or numbers or the various different data types. So, this has been a
quick run through, again, trying to sweat some of the small stuff in terms of
what the Data Explorer can offer you. We're also working on Sparkline
histograms and things within the summary panel, and in the future, more direct
connections with remote databases. And thank you so much for the time.
Hello. My name is Jonathan. I'm a software architect here at Posit. And over the
last few talks, we have looked into a lot of Positron's features. Today, I'm
going to be talking to you a little bit about how Positron works under the
covers. So, by the end of this talk, you will understand the following. You'll
understand why we chose to build something new. You'll understand what the
big pieces of Positron are. And finally, you will understand how they work
together. So, let me start out with the elephant in the room, which is, why
didn't you just build something on top of RStudio? So, to answer that question,
we need to kind of go back to our goal from Positron, which Julia talked about
a bit. We wanted to make an IDE that was truly multilingual, polyglot IDE,
that's focused on data science. And I want to focus in a little bit on that
phrase, polyglot IDE. So, to understand why it's very difficult to build a
truly polyglot IDE on the foundation of RStudio, you need to understand a
little bit about how RStudio itself works. So, in RStudio, it's basically a
two-process system. Everything that is inside the RStudio window comes from
one process that runs R, all the computations that you do. It also takes
care of saving files, serving up the HTML UI, and doing everything else.
This, by the way, is why a lot of RStudio features are slow or don't work well
while R is busy. The only other piece of RStudio is Electron, which runs as
the Chrome outside the window. It draws the window frame as well as the UI.
Here's another view of the same architecture in boxes this time. And this
can kind of give you an intuition for why it's very difficult to add another
language subsystem here. There's no place to put it. You can run Python in
RStudio, but when you do, it has to run inside of R. So, you can see why this
is a really challenging environment on which to build a truly polyglot data
science tool. Let's look at the other part of that phrase. We want a polyglot
IDE that is focused on data science. You know, people love RStudio, but we
get a lot of comments from people saying things like, you know, I love RStudio.
RStudio is really great, but. It's really great, but can I please, please pop
out individual panes? RStudio is really great, but can I please have special
level control over my themes? You know, could I please, please find files,
hidden directories? Could I please save and load custom pane layouts? Could I
please have shortcuts? Could I please have gate stash? Could I please have
custom BIM key bindings? Could I please have a tree view?
My goodness, we love all these suggestions, but there's a lot of them,
right? And these things all have something in common, which is that these
are not data science features. These are IDE features, right? And so, with every
release of RStudio, we've had to make tough choices about whether we invest
in those IDE features or whether we bring data science specific features.
And that's why we made the difficult decision not to build on the RStudio
platform when we started the Positron project.
Positron is a fork of another project called Code OSS. And you can be forgiven
for not knowing what Code OSS is, but I promise you, you do know what it is,
because Code OSS is the foundation for a proprietary IDE that almost all of you
have used, which is called Visual Studio Code.
We are not the only people to fork Code OSS. Many other companies have forked
Code OSS to make IDEs that are specific for other purposes. For example, there's
a company called Cursor that makes an IDE called the Cursor IDE with a lot of
AI features. So, we are doing something very similar with Positron. We are
taking the Code OSS foundation and adding data science tools to it.
And we've already covered this a little bit in the session, but what that looks
like is taking that powerful IDE foundation and adding tools like environment
selections, plots and visualization pane, a really first-class console, an
amazing data explorer, and so forth.
So, this brings me to the second elephant in the room, which is, why isn't
Positron a VS Code extension?
So, to answer that question, I've got my good friend Twilight Sparkle here.
So, Microsoft learned a lot from their experience with other IDEs.
IDEs like Atom, for example, and Emacs, they allow you to load extensions and
they become kind of part of the IDE.
This can lead to a lot of clutter and slowness and instability.
And so, when Microsoft built Code OSS, they learned to put the extensions in a
sandbox and run them separately from the IDE.
The other thing Microsoft learned is that when you give people the ability to do
anything you want with extensions, they just can't help themselves.
It is a mess, right?
And so, Microsoft learned their lesson and Visual Studio Code extensions are
fairly limited.
They can't contribute custom UI to the Workbench service.
They run on that separate sandbox process.
They're ephemeral.
They can be restarted at any time.
They stop running when the browser is closed.
And finally, probably most importantly for us, they don't make sense as a
foundation for other extensions, right?
R and Python and these other language packs are extensions to Positron.
And it's very difficult to build a horizontal layer that provides that
extensibility when you are yourself running in the sandbox.
So, finally, let's talk a little bit about how R and Python talk to these
Positron features.
So, R and Python are extensions.
We call them language packs for Positron.
And they talk to the code OSS features in the same way that most other
extensions do.
So, VS Code has an API, which is what allows extensions to contribute things
like auto-completion and diagnostics.
So, you've seen a lot of Positron's specific features and we've added a
separate parallel API that allows the extensions to not only contribute
code completion and diagnostics, but also plug into our console, our plots
pane, and the rest of our tools.
It's important to note, then, that those R and Python sessions live in
extensions.
And this is important not only for extensibility, but also for this
reason.
How many of you have seen this screen before?
Yeah.
So, this is what happens when R crashes in RStudio.
And the reason that it crashes the whole window is because, as we just
established, that window is itself R.
Everything is coming from R.
So, this is what an R crash looks like in RStudio.
Here is what an R crash looks like in Positron.
It's nothing.
It is horribly obliterated.
You will lose anything you've got in memory because your R process crashed,
but the rest of the IDE will continue to run very smoothly.
Now, the final reason that it's really important to have all these things in
extensions is that this allows Positron to be extended to other languages in
the future.
And this is something Julia alluded to really well, which is that we want
Positron to be a foundation upon which more data science tooling can be built.
And all of the R and Python code that we have written plugs into a public API
that anybody can write for.
So, it's not tightly integrated into the core.
Everything in the Positron core can be added to by anybody via a public API.
So, we have Positron and we have these language packs.
I want to talk for just a minute about how those two things talk to each other.
So, when we built Positron, we wanted to use standard protocols for standard
functionality.
And what that means is that when those R and language subsystems talk to
Positron, they use protocols that have already been established in the data
science community.
When we run an execute code, we are using the Jupyter protocol.
When we do completion and diagnostics, we're using the language server
protocol.
We've only added our own protocols when we have Positron specific features that
we need to power.
So, quick recap.
It is a polyglot IDE.
It's focused on data science.
It's a code OSS fork like VS Code is.
Those extensions live with language features.
We use existing protocols wherever we can to make it easy for other people to
plug in.
And we have a public API that lets anyone add new languages or features.
Hello, my name is Lionel, and I'm here with my colleague Davis to talk to you
about ARC, which is a component in Positron.
So, Davis and I are from the Tide Divers group, and we've been working for a
number of years on packages like dplyr.
And for the last year, a bit more than that, we've been working on Positron
with the mission to make it easier for other people to use Positron.
To help making R support the best it can be in Positron.
So, we've seen with Jonathan that Positron is a multilingual IDE.
And we've seen with Isabel that we've broadened our scope to include Python.
And so, the question that we want to answer in this talk is, where does that
leave us with R?
And the answer is that we wanted to make the R support the most modern it could be,
and the result is ARC.
So, when you use R in Positron, ARC is behind most of what's happening.
So, if you type R code and get some completions, ARC is providing the completions.
If you need to execute a piece of R code and get some output from R,
that goes through ARC as well.
So, what does it take to make a great development experience for R?
There are three main things that ARC is concerned with.
First, code execution, so sourcing of script or executing a piece of code.
Code assistance, so that ranges anything from completions to diagnostics to let you know
that there might be a problem in your code even before you execute it.
Or contextual help.
And the final piece is the debugger.
We want to make the debugging experience in Positron the least frustrating it can be.
And each of these areas is backed by a standard protocol,
and we'll see in this talk why this is important and why it matters.
And we'll start with execution.
So, here you have a classic Positron setup.
You have an open R file with a bunch of code.
You have a console and a plot pane.
And the user here has created a data frame,
got some output in a console, and created a plot.
So, where does ARC fit in this picture?
So, you can think of code that you execute in Positron as a question that Positron asks to ARC.
ARC does a bit of magic and then provides an answer back to Positron,
which is able to display the output in the console.
The same thing when you create a plot.
ARC does a bit of magic after getting the question from Positron
and provides the answer back to Positron.
So, the question is, how does this work?
What is the language that ARC and Positron use to communicate with each other?
And to answer this, we'll take a step back and look at what's going on in the Jupyter world.
So, here we have a Jupyter notebook.
If you're not familiar with this way of doing data science,
you have a document made up of cells.
You can write code in the cells and you execute these cells
and you get the output included in the document.
So, this is very popular in the Python community.
But the thing about Jupyter is that it works with multiple languages.
It's multilingual, just like Positron.
And it's even in the name.
So, if you did not know, Jupyter stands for Julia, Python, and R.
And so, the way they pull this off is not by implementing support for all these languages.
They have independent backends called kernels.
And so, when a Jupyter notebook needs to execute a piece of code,
it's like a question.
The kernel gets the question, provides an answer back to the notebook.
And Jupyter came up with a standard set of questions and answers.
And in this case, it's an execute request that is asked to the Jupyter kernel
and the kernel provides an execute response back.
And that's exactly what we needed to communicate between Positron and Arc.
And so, Arc is a Jupyter kernel.
And actually, in this notebook, this is Arc running in the background,
running the R code for the notebook.
And so, in Positron, it's the same thing.
You run a piece of R code.
This is an execute request from the Jupyter protocol.
And Arc provides back an execute response.
And the nice thing about this is that it doesn't have to be a Jupyter notebook.
It doesn't have to be Positron.
It can be any project that implements the Jupyter protocol.
So, a few weeks ago, we were super excited when we've seen that the Z people
saw this new idea written in Rust that implements many interesting ideas.
And a few weeks ago, they've implemented support for Jupyter notebooks
and they made sure that Arc would work great in Z.
And so, here you have R code running in Z.
Using Arc.
And we hope that many more projects will be able to do the same in the future.
While code execution is certainly a very important part of this,
it's not the only piece of the puzzle, or not all pieces of the puzzle.
We also think that it's really important to have fantastic
code assistance inside of Positron.
Now, code assistance just means anything that makes it easier for you to write R code.
That could look like diagnostics, where we analyze all the files in your project
and can pop up a little tooltip that says,
hey, we think something's wrong here.
You might want to take a look.
Code assistance could also look like a function signature,
where you're working with SliceMax.
You don't necessarily need to remember all of the arguments.
We can pop up a signature and say, here, hey, here's what they are.
Assistance could also look like jump to definition.
Jump to definition looks like this, where you can click on SliceMax,
and that takes you straight through to the definition of the function inside of your project.
Now, these are features that you might have been familiar with in RStudio,
but Positron has a number of code assistance features that are unique to it as well.
One of those is help on hover, which I really like.
It looks like this, where you hover over SliceMax,
and you get this really great inline documentation immediately.
This is great whenever you're actually just kind of in the flow state of writing R code.
You don't necessarily need a whole help pane.
You just kind of need to quickly remember how something works.
You hover over it, get what you need to know, and you go back to work.
Now, these features in Positron work in a very similar way as executing code.
Code execution worked through the Jupyter protocol.
It allowed us to ask questions and send back answers,
and code assistance works in the same way.
With the Jupyter protocol, that really allowed us to standardize these questions and answers.
With code assistance, we used the language server protocol,
which standardizes the questions and answers in a very similar way.
We ask a hover request of Arc, and Arc can send back a hover response in return.
The reason that, again, that is so cool is because Arc doesn't care who's on the other side.
It doesn't care who's asking the question.
It could be Positron, it could be a Jupyter notebook, it could be some other IDE.
As long as it implements the other half of the language server protocol, you're in business.
Over on the right-hand side here, our magic 8-ball, Arc,
is doing quite a bit of work to actually send back these responses.
Part of the smarts of Arc is wrapped up in a technology called TreeSitter.
The only thing you need to know about TreeSitter in this talk
is that it takes in all of the R code in your project.
We run it through TreeSitter, and it spits out a structured representation of that code,
which honestly doesn't even look like R at this point.
However, we can use that and power all of the assistance features
that we've been talking about today.
Now, we think TreeSitter is really cool as a project because it works with any language.
As long as you have a grammar that teaches TreeSitter how to work with that language,
then you're good to go.
The problem was we didn't have an R grammar for TreeSitter, so we had to build one.
Now, we've built it to work with Arc and Positron,
but as it turns out, there's actually a lot of community benefits
to having an R grammar for TreeSitter.
For example, if you were to bring that R grammar over into Zed or NeoVim
or other editors that support TreeSitter,
it can power things like syntax highlighting or indentation immediately over there as well.
And there's also one other big player that uses TreeSitter.
It's GitHub.
If you've been on GitHub in the past couple weeks,
and you've done a search, say, for case when on dplyr,
you may have noticed that the search results for R have gotten really, really good.
In this case, we found a function called case when.
If you click on that function, it will jump you straight to the definition in the project.
This is just like jump to definition in Positron itself.
It's a great way to actually explore a new project
without having to pull it down completely.
The reason this works is because behind the scenes,
GitHub code search uses TreeSitter.
Now, up until a few weeks ago, this did not work for R
because there was no R grammar for TreeSitter.
We built one.
So we were able to work with the team at GitHub on their code search engine
and get them to incorporate our R grammar into their code search engine.
And as of a couple weeks ago, it doesn't just work for dplyr.
It works for all R projects, cost GitHub.
I have one more thing about Arc that I want to talk about today.
That's the debugger.
Now, if you've never used a debugger before,
you probably have done something like credit debugging.
That's the idea of sticking in a whole bunch of print statements
inside of your functions, rerunning it again.
Hopefully, you get some more information out of it
and can figure out where the problem is.
A debugger is one more step beyond that.
You actually get to step through that code one line at a time,
stop at any point like we've done here inside of mutate,
and then kind of investigate the world around you.
In this case, you could use the debug variables pane
and see what variables exist at this point in time
and what their values are.
It probably won't surprise you to hear at this point
that we've implemented the debugger
through just another set of standard questions and answers.
For example, Positron might ask Arc,
hey, what variables exist at this point in time?
Arc sends back a standard answer
and that populates this variables pane you see here.
Now, with code execution, we use the Jupyter protocol.
With code assistance, we use the language server protocol.
With the debugger, we use a third called the debug adapter.
Now, I have one demo of the debugger that I'd like to show
because I think it's super cool.
This is the most mind-blowing feature.
So, I'm a tidyverse developer,
so I work on dplyr quite a bit,
and that means I debug mutate quite a bit.
So, for better or worse.
So, I have gone ahead and set a breakpoint
deep inside of mutate here.
We can trigger that breakpoint by running the code.
That drops us directly inside of mutate.
We can do a couple of steps here to step through the code.
You'll see the debug variables pane populates
and you get your very important variables here and their values.
But I actually want to talk about where we've stopped.
We've stopped on a very important place.
It's the boundary between the R code of dplyr
and the C++ code of dplyr.
As tidyverse developers, we write a lot of C and C++
because we want the tidyverse to feel as fast as possible for you all.
We know we're not alone.
We know that you write a lot of packages with rcvp, cpp11,
because you want your packages to feel fast too.
But that typically comes with trade-offs.
While you get performance,
you end up losing a lot in terms of debuggability.
You can't step through the code near as easily
like in RStudio like you can with R,
and you kind of end up resorting back to print debugging
like we talked about before.
However, in Positron, you can do this.
One more step, and we've stepped directly from the R code of dplyr
into the C++ code of dplyr.
This is absolutely insane.
It's something you've never had before,
and you have all the same tools available.
The debug variable is paying.
You can step through the code.
You can look at the call stack.
You have a debug console.
Everything is just there.
The way that this works is because on the R side,
we implemented the debug adapter protocol.
Someone else has implemented the C side of the debug adapter protocol.
As they use the same set of standard questions and answers,
they just work together.
You can step from R to C and even back,
and everything just works.
It's pretty magic.
That is the power of using the modern and standard tooling inside of R.
Can you talk?
Go ahead.
So Arc knows a lot about R,
and it does a lot to support the workflow of R users in Positron.
It does this with standard protocols and technologies.
We've seen three ways in which using standards like this
allowed us to contribute to the development of the R code.
Allowed us to contribute to the community and reach a larger audience.
So we've seen how R can be used not only in Positron,
not only in Jupyter Notebooks,
but in any front-end that implement these protocols like the ZID.
We've seen how by providing an R grammar for TreeSitter,
we were able to implement tons of useful features for Arc and Positron,
but also contribute to other projects like GitHub and all of the users.
And finally, we've seen how as Thai-diverse developers working with Positron,
we were able to benefit from a C and C++ debugger implemented by another group
in the same way that our R debugger will benefit other projects.
And so that's the great thing about using these standards
is that the functionality is not locked in.
So you can be a Jupyter Notebook user and use Arc
and benefit from all this functionality in the same way that Positron users are.
And so on a personal note,
when I learned that Positron would implement R support in this way,
I was super excited.
Because despite having worked for RStudio for a long time now,
now Posit,
I've never actually been an RStudio user.
So when I was a student, I learned to use Emacs.
And when I joined RStudio,
this was a tool I was familiar with.
So I kept using it to develop Thai-diverse packages.
But I was a bit jealous of my colleagues that were using RStudio
because obviously the R support is very good in RStudio.
And completions, for instance, were much better than what I had in Emacs.
So with Arc,
I immediately saw that I could write a bit of glue
and having Emacs talk to Arc
and finally enjoy the same level of functionality as my colleagues.
So that's not what happened in the end.
I switched from Emacs to Positron.
And with the ecosystem of VS Code extensions,
I don't miss much from my previous setup.
So I have everything that I need to do my R work
and work with other languages in Positron.
But the point is that I didn't have to switch.
Like it was a free choice.
And so while there's still a lot of work to make this a reality,
that's the promise that we want to deliver with Arc.
That no matter what tools and environments you're using to do your R work,
Arc will be there to help with that.
Thanks for attending the exciting Positron session.
So you've heard that Davis and Lionel were lent out
from the Tidyverse team to the Positron team.
And if you just scooch that little logo away,
you see that I too am on this very exciting adventure.
And I have perhaps found it even more exciting than they have.
And there's at least two sources of excitement, I'll call it,
or a lot of personal growth.
So one is having to write in programming languages that are quite new to me,
and that's pretty stressful.
So there's been a lot of personal growth,
but also working in a new IDE feels super uncomfortable.
And so you're seeing Positron here.
But so all my work over the past year or so has happened
either in VS Code or in Positron,
and that's required a lot of adjustments.
And as we're all saying, no one needs to make this switch.
But if you're a longtime RStudio user
and you want to take Positron out for a test drive,
I want you to have a good experience.
So these are going to close with a few tips
for how to make that test drive as successful as possible.
So my first tip, which will surprise no one,
is that I encourage you to work inside a workspace or a folder or a project.
It's a really important concept in Positron.
The good news is that really is just a folder.
You can make it more complicated, but you do not have to.
Analogous to a project in RStudio.
And there are many areas of the Positron user interface
that are warmly encouraging you to open a folder.
And that allows all sorts of IDEs to turn on cool features for you.
So once you're in a folder, for example,
your file explorer will come to life.
In Positron, because this comes from VS Code,
you can't even browse your files until you open a folder.
And that'll allow you to see the files and folders inside your workspace.
And it will also set the working directory for your interpreter,
whether it's R or Python correctly.
Another super exciting feature that you saw earlier
that is truly new for R users
is it's actually quite easy to have multiple versions of R
living in harmony on your computer
and to switch between them with quite a lot of fluidity.
So you'll be able to access that
in this interpreter dropdown that we've shown you.
And if you have Python installed, it will be up there as well.
But really important for the R users
is you will have multiple versions of R there
if you've installed multiple versions.
And the console will always be reminding you
which one is currently active.
So I think in this case, I have R Devel,
the current release of R and the old release of R.
And so I want to give a quick shout out to a tool called Rig.
This is not part of Positron,
but it's a separate little tool that is newly important,
because it helps R users manage multiple R installations.
So it'll help you install multiple versions of R
and switch between which one you want to have
as your current default.
And little known fact,
this is actually easier to do on Windows than on Mac,
which is like a first for anything.
So this is actually especially important for Mac users
to have multiple versions of R
that are actually fully functional.
And the new IDE gives us a chance to pick new defaults.
So Positron will default into a blank slate lifestyle,
meaning when you fire it up,
your workspace is going to be empty by default.
And when you leave,
we also aren't going to write that to file.
You can live differently,
but we're going to try to help people do this
because we think it's good
for the long-term reproducibility of your work.
Because if you have really important objects,
you really want to save the code that made them.
And if you have a really, really important object,
you want to explicitly write it somewhere
instead of having it sort of live in your global environment.
Another really important concept in Positron
is the command palette.
RStudio has a command palette,
but at least as a longtime user,
it came late enough in the game
that I personally never started using it,
as Tom well knows.
And you really need to use the command palette in Positron,
I would say.
So control or command shift P
will bring up this beautiful, wonderful,
long menu of commands that you could run
as a very great fuzzy finder.
So you just start typing something related
to what you think you want to do.
And here I've brought up a whole bunch of commands
that are super relevant to R.
And in particular,
you'll see lots of R package development commands here.
So a lot of things that you might be used to doing
in RStudio with a button
or some highly specialized pane,
like the build pane,
are available in the command palette, Positron.
But they're there,
but they're not sort of smacking you
between the eyes as much.
So you will go look for them here.
Positron is very customizable.
So you're probably going to want to work
on your user settings.
And if you search in your settings for RStudio,
there is an optional RStudio key map
that I think most RStudio users will want to enable.
So check this box.
And your usual keyboard shortcuts from RStudio
will start working and doing the same thing
inside Positron.
And another thing you might want to do
is customize your layout.
So that's another thing you can access
from the command palette or from the upper right.
And you'll be presented with a menu
of kind of inspiring looking layouts.
And the top three are all Positron specific.
And they're layouts we think you might like
for doing data science work.
And the very top one, stacked layout,
is the most reminiscent of the four panes
you're used to seeing in RStudio.
So the last thing I want to talk about
is this activity bar on the left.
And I want to demystify a few of the icons there.
So the one with a lot of little boxes
is how you get insight into your extensions.
So you might go there at first
and you either don't see anything
or you're being invited to search
for extensions you might like.
And it allows you to install extensions
from the open VSX registry.
And this gets at the thing
that Jonathan was talking about.
There's lots of capabilities
you might want to add to Positron
that don't have anything to do with data science.
So I love rainbow indentation.
And so I have this rainbow indent extension.
And this is a sampling of the kind of extensions
I tend to have enabled in Positron.
Right below that is this little flask.
So if your current workspace is an R package
that uses TestFat,
this will open a test explorer.
I don't think many people have discovered this.
So this is like a little Easter egg.
It will give you insight.
It'll show all of your test files,
all the individual test cases within them.
Helps you to navigate.
You can execute them one at a time
by clicking on them.
And you have a little icon that's green or red
showing you the current passing versus failing status.
So seven of us got the pleasure
of giving these talks to you today.
But I want to make sure that you know
this is a product of a much larger team.
So these are all the people past and current
who have contributed to get us to the point
where Positron is today.
So I want you to see their names.
I want you to see their faces.
And we would all like to acknowledge
everything they have done.
And that's the end of both my talk
and this whole session.
So we will have a chance for questions.
If you want to install Positron
with this sort of beta mood we have here,
you still need to go to a GitHub repository,
which is this one up here.
I would go straight to the wiki,
which will give you actual installation instructions.
And then we really look forward
to having you take it out for a test drive
and give us feedback on what's missing,
what's working great.
And we can't wait to hear from you.
Thanks.
Testing.
There we go.
Thank you so much for that.
I am so excited for Positron personally.
I have a few questions for you.
And I'm going to try and batch
some of the questions together.
So if I don't get your exact questions, sorry.
What is Positron still missing today
that currently is supported in RStudio?
Why would someone want to wait to adopt Positron?
I'll give one answer.
One thing that is not yet implemented
is inline output in Cordo files
and some of the complete affordances
around R Markdown.
So the Positron leans on the Cordo extension
for this kind of work,
whether you're writing Cordo files
or R Markdown files.
So a lot of functionality is there
and will really get you off to a good start.
But if you have really advanced use cases
or very specific preferences
in terms of how your code is executed,
that might be something
to stick with RStudio for.
So there's something else
we should add to that list, R Cordo.
That'd be a big one.
That'd be a big one right now.
Thank you.
Are all VS Code extensions
compatible with Positron?
What is OpenVSX?
And especially, can I use GitHub Copilot?
Perfect.
Yeah.
So Positron uses
a extension marketplace called OpenVSX.
OpenVSX is a vendor neutral repository
of VS Code compatible extensions.
So Cursor uses that,
Positron, VS Codium,
a bunch of different forks
that are maintained of Cordo SS.
There are some notable kind of,
I guess, extensions that people ask about.
I think someone actually just said Copilot.
So GitHub Copilot is one
that's not available on there,
although there are, I think,
10 or 11 other providers
of generative AI LLMs.
And Jenny was actually using
Continue if I saw.
Okay.
Continue is actually a local model use.
So you could use like Ollama
to run a generative AI tool
locally on your laptop or your machine,
pay nobody,
and never kind of like send your data out.
So there's some good options there.
Thank you.
What is the timeline for Positron
on Workbench or PositCloud?
Soon on Workbench.
So I'm also the product manager
for Posit Workbench.
We're actively working
on Positron sessions there.
Jonathan is actually going to be
doing a lot of work
along with a few other devs
on the Positron team
for integrating that
along with the Workbench team.
So stay tuned.
It will still be in preview
on Workbench planned for this year,
but we'd love to hear feedback
about when it's there.
Thank you.
Will there be push button
deployment to Posit Connect
for Shiny apps documents
like there is for RStudio?
And actually, I'm going to take this one
because a team that I am on
is working on that.
So yes, there will be.
It's actually available in beta.
You can go to the OpenVSX marketplace.
You can use it in both VS Code
and Positron.
Try it out.
We'd love to hear your feedback.
Yeah, so it's in an extension,
which really highlights
like the value,
like why some of these choices
we made are just paying off
in some great ways,
like the Cordo extension,
the Shiny extension,
the Publisher extension.
Like by making some of these choices,
we're really happy
with the user experience
that is starting to grow up around this.
Awesome.
Let's get to some later ones.
Is there a dark theme?
Yes.
Well, OK, yes, but also you can,
like there's one zillion extensions
for themes so you can.
There are, I think,
three built-in themes to Positron,
but you can make,
you can bling out your IDE
like Isabelle's is always like Barbie Pink
and what some of our co-workers
add little extensions
where like pets are running around
on the bottom,
like little animals are animated.
Like because we,
these extensions are available,
your ability to customize
what it looks like is very new.
For as you are coming from our studio,
the extensibility
and customizability is extremely high.
How does Positron handle
larger than memory data?
For example,
does it still try and compute
potentially expensive summary statistics
like the number of unique values?
If you're asking about the Data Explorer
specifically,
there are some built-in guardrails,
but again, it's kind of the idea
of the Data Explorer works
with in-memory data already.
There's some long-term stuff
we'd love to do with DuckDB
on predicate pushdown,
basically doing some of the Data Explorer
things with on disk out of memory data,
but that doesn't exist today.
For R and Python,
it would be the same story of
there are tools like Arrow,
DuckDB, databases in general,
where you can make queries in R or Python
that communicate with an external resource
or on disk data.
If you are debugging a reticulate package,
does the arc debugger
step through the Python code?
Will it step into Cython parts as well?
No.
We thought a little bit about that,
but we are also not sure
there will be a lot of use cases,
but that's certainly something
that we could look into if there were.
We do have some issues open
about like increased reticulate support.
So if that's a particular interest of yours,
you know, search through,
find those issues,
add info about your use case,
thumbs up,
so that we can prioritize
increased support for particular
reticulate use cases
versus other stuff that's on our plate.
Is it correct that RStudio
will be maintained going forward
and there will not be
focus on new features or both?
Well, I mean, RStudio has some got
some great new features lately.
Tom, you'll be a great one
to speak to this in detail.
Yeah, luckily, Kevin was the person
kind of keeping us all on time.
So Kevin and Gary, Ron and a few others
are still working on the RStudio IDE team.
So you can imagine that this is, again,
an expansion of our focus
where we have a brand new team
working on the new IDE
and then another team working on RStudio.
So committed to maintaining
and improving RStudio.
Some of the feature requests
that Jonathan highlighted
that are like theoretically
impossible to do in RStudio.
Some of those might come to Positron,
but this is not kind of
the end of RStudio
as much as like there's a new project
that's working in parallel.
Thank you.
How is the Git pane compared to RStudio?
That's a great question.
It's been, I'll be,
I'll be totally honest with you.
It's been a little divisive.
I prefer the Git experience
in Positron because it's,
it is, it inherits from VS Code.
But for some folks who have come
from RStudio for a long time,
it has taken a little bit of an adjustment.
Do you want to speak to it at all, Jenny?
Like the adjustment or?
People just want me to, you know,
threaten to burn a computer down.
I do use the Git functionality
a little bit in Positron,
but I did love the Git functionality
in RStudio more.
So I just find that I usually
have another client running.
So, no.
Okay.
See, the license man,
I'm on the other side of this.
Like RStudio is good,
but like Positron is amazing.
I completely changed the way I used
like the Git stuff over there.
And to be fair, you do use an external,
like a third party, like a Git thing
most of the time I would say.
So I was like only RStudio.
That was my little bit of Git experience.
So to go from that to Positron for me
was just like, it opened like floodgates.
I think it's really good.
I'm with Jenny on this one.
I love the simplicity of RStudio's Git.
And if I need anything more than that,
I go to the command line.
But again, divisive.
For R package developers
who created integrations with RStudio,
will they need to learn how to build
VS Code extensions or does Posit
intend to offer tooling around this?
We don't.
Anybody?
TBD.
We can do that.
I could talk.
I could talk about that for just
just a second.
So Positron does implement
a fairly large subset of something
called the RStudio API,
which is the way that R packages
talk to RStudio and control it
and automate it.
Packages like use this and so forth.
Use the RStudio API a lot.
And a lot of those API calls
work today in Positron.
But not all of them.
So there is some support.
The other thing we don't currently
support is RStudio add-ins.
So if your package includes
an RStudio add-in,
that doesn't currently integrate
with Positron,
you know, other than the existing
kind of RStudio API calls
that are in the package.
So those are both areas
that we are working to improve.
And that's support for.
But as of today,
what we have is a support for a
limited subset of the RStudio API.
Do our project files
load normally in Positron?
It is not used by Positron.
Positron's sense of what is the space
in which you are working
is more about folders.
So there's not an explicit file
that it's looking for to say,
this is my project.
You can open a folder as a workspace
and then you get those benefits
of workspace project-based workflows.
But there isn't an explicit file.
We know things like here
work great in Positron,
depending on the specifics.
I have not run into anything
that had a problem
with something like here.
So in many ways,
it's like lowered the bar
for having a encapsulated,
this is what I'm working on right now.
So think about a workspace equaling
approximately a folder,
equaling approximately
RStudio projects.
Like they're basically all the same.
And I'd say it's actually,
there's less to worry about
than there was before.
What does the Positron logo mean?
It is a P for Positron
and it's a particle.
And yeah, that's what we've got so far.
Yeah, nothing more deep
than that right now.
Can we connect to existing servers
via SSH from Positron?
As of yesterday, yes.
It is a very experimental feature.
But if you, since you're all here,
I can tell you there's a secret setting
that we added,
which is no longer going to be
a secret ad for today.
But there's a setting
called experimental remote host.
So if you go in your settings in Positron
and search for that,
it will allow you to connect over SSH
and run R or Python
on a backend Linux system.
Perfect.
Is there support for using
Rn environments,
like you can use Python virtual environments
and select them from the drop down?
Or is that just the interpreter?
Just the interpreter for now,
but there is an open issue
about an enhanced kind of environments pane
that gives you more UI
around choosing like Rn
kind of environments.
Rn does work as of today
but it works in much the same
it works like in RStudio
that you'll pop in,
you'll get that,
use that library of packages.
If you're particularly interested in,
I'd like, you know,
I want to have more UI gestures
around dealing with my Rn environments.
There's an open issue
that we'd encourage you to add any details
or to thumbs up.
Will it be possible to share a Positron
workspace for collaboration,
like with LiveShare?
So LiveShare is another one of the
proprietary extensions
that works only with VS Code, for example.
So in the future,
there might be more collaborative experiences.
That's, you know,
a goal of what we can do with Positron.
You can kind of think of in RStudio,
both in Positic Cloud and Workbench,
there was an idea of project sharing,
which had real-time collaboration
as well as directory sharing.
I'd love for us to go in that direction,
but that's more on like the roadmap
as opposed to today.
Can we run Positron in AWS EC2?
Positron is a desktop IDE.
You have a remote kind of SSH,
the work that Jonathan was alluding to,
where you can say,
my ID is local,
but my compute is connected to a remote server,
or you can have it on Posit Workbench,
which could run either on on-premise servers,
AWS, Azure, Google, wherever you want.
Will Positron be integrated for use with Databricks
like RStudio is, and when?
So, double-parted question.
There is a Databricks extension
that already works with Positron.
So that you could use from, again,
like your desktop and connect to Databricks
for data access or Spark compute.
Posit Workbench would add on managed credentials,
which is an IDE,
and then you can run Posit Workbench
on your own,
which is an idea of like,
rather than using personal access token,
it knows who you are and, you know,
understands the data governance
and applies that to your user space.
So you don't have to worry about any credentialing there.
Okay, we've got about two minutes left.
So I'm going to ask a possibly trolling question,
but why not simply call it Python Studio?
Well, I mean, the real answer there
is that this is our vision for this,
is that it is for multiple languages,
for data science.
Like today, you know,
many of us are using R and Python,
but it is, that may not be true moving forward.
There's really exciting stuff happening
in the data science space,
and we want to build something
that allows us to have the flexibility
to add new language packs
as they become important.
So it truly is like,
and, you know, those of us who have worked on it,
in some ways it's kind of a headache
because there's a lot of layers,
a lot of like, oh, this part can't know about R,
but this is the part that knows about R,
but it is on purpose
so that we can build a tool
that will support you for quite a long time,
be an excellent tool for your data analysis,
depending on, you know,
what happens 10 years from now,
20 years from now,
as you move on in your career.
So it is, you know, it is not PyStudio
the way like an RStudio for a Python would be.
It is something that is built
to be truly, truly polyglot.
I'll give an equal kind of trolling answer,
which is one of my good friends at Posit,
by the way, Posit, Positron,
there's some connection there,
but my good friend, Ron Bloom,
Posit Ron, and he's a QA engineer
that does some testing.
So that's the real secret
is it's named after him.
Okay.
Let me say one final thing.
So us as a team and anybody else
who's here at PositConf
who is working on Positron
is going to be in the lounge tomorrow morning.
We're going to have an open Q&A,
a more casual Q&A.
So if you want to come up
and ask us questions,
we invite you before the keynote tomorrow
to join us in the lounge.
And that's it for us, right?
Yep. Thank you so much.
Thank you.